Fantastic.
I'll just check if we've got some questions from the audience out there.
But whilst we're actually waiting for that, Donna, I just want to come back to you.
In listening in on the private sector component, have you seen private sector in your work
coming to be engaged, for instance, within the Red Cross system or coming to approach
you and say we can support you in how you respond to disasters in certain areas or how
we can support you in terms of moving forward and prepare those communities should another
disaster hit them?
Yes, very much so.
I fully agree that the private sector's engagement has really increased tremendously through
the years.
Even in the humanitarian work, we see them helping us test innovative approaches like
the forecast-based financing where we are actually trying to act beforehand and act
based on forecasts and test this in various communities and even business models.
I think through the years, because we continuously experience extreme events, and the communities
and private sectors, even government, are already finding ways to work together and
to actually address the situation and bring in different expertise.
So the scientist brings in the science, the private sector brings in the business model,
and then the communities bring in the actions on the ground.
I think everyone now is headed towards this common mindset that we need to do more together
and in a fast way.
So, yes, I think it's very encouraging to see the coherence, convergence of private
sector communities, scientists and government in this.
That's fantastic to hear about the convergence.
Now everybody is kind of converging to the middle and trying to provide solutions.
There is a question here that says are there innovative financial tools to support adaptation
from the private sector?
Emerson, do you want to give a shot at that?
Sure.
We have been supporting and financing private sector using a range of different financial
instruments from subsidized loans through guarantees.
One thing that is coming up more and more on our agenda is a discussion about debt,
capital markets using debt with bonds.
Green bonds is something that has been widely used.
We see municipalities more engaged with that too.
We stand ready to engage in that conversation and support not only that particular instrument
but others that make sense.
Jamie, would you have a reaction to that as well?
There is some great work that's ongoing.
The problem is that this divide that you have with people getting left behind is even broader
when you look at financial mechanisms to mobilize financial resources.
If you look at cities, for example, medium-sized cities, very few of them, less than 1% actually
have a credit rating that would allow them to access international financial markets
to support their adaptation measures.
The more we focus on traditional financing mechanisms or even slight versions of those
traditional financing mechanisms, the more we're going to see this financing flow continue
to the high capacity countries, high capacity cities, high capacity communities, and the
more we're going to see what are deemed the higher risk investments, the local communities,
the extremely vulnerable people, the extremely vulnerable countries being left behind.
We need to be very cautious as we move forward with these private financing mechanisms that
we combine the new mechanisms with capacity building and strengthening of the skills of
people on the ground so they can actually make use of these.
Whilst I have you there, Jamie.
A lot of us within a few years, actually, in about 20 years, we're going to be living
in cities, at least 80% of the world's population.
Are you beginning to see a lot of adaptation technologies for cities now?
Yeah, we are.
What we're seeing now is that technology is catching up with policies.
If you take, for example, Thailand.
Thailand has this really very advanced building code for resilient buildings that are very
energy efficient, that are dealing with heat waves and things like that.
But nothing has happened.
The policy hasn't been implemented.
The reason is that developers, architects are saying we don't really know.
This is a great policy, but we don't know how to implement it.
What do we do?
What do I do when I'm designing my building?
This is where technology is finally beginning to come in and say here's your answer.
Here's your new building material.
Here's your efficient air conditioner.
Here's your new way of managing your building's energy system so that it is more climate efficient
and more resilient.
Do you think that just as a last thought, that we need, based on what Jamie has articulated,
we need a lot of this north, south and south, south learning to be able to find solutions
around adaptation?
I'll add one more to that.
North, south, south, south and south, north.
Because the north can learn a lot of things from the south.
Actions are being done on the ground and communities have been adapting for decades.
We just call them differently.
I think we need to really find that vertical, horizontal connection.
Because at the end of the day, it's not about where the learning is coming from or where
the money is coming from.
But if this is actually used to address the needs on the ground.
Right.
Well, thank you so much, all of you.
Ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls out there, thank you so much for joining us.
And we wish you a very lovely day.
And please check out our site just below this link.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
